=pod

=for vim
   vim: tw=72 ts=3 sts=3 sw=3 et ai :

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Data::Tubes::Plugin::Plumbing

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module contains I<tubes> factories for handling general plumbing
requirements, e.g. put some other I<tubes> in a sequence.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

=over

=item B<< alternatives >>

   $tube = alternatives(@tubes); # OR
   $tube = alternatives(@tubes, \%args);

consider a series of tubes as different alternatives, to be triggered in
order until one of them returns something.

In simple terms, the first item in C<@tubes> is called with the input
record. If it returns I<nothing>, the second item in C<@tubes> is tried,
and so on. The first one to return something (i.e. a record, or multiple
ones) wins and its result is returned. Think of it as some I<OR>
function in tubeland.

If no tube returns anything, the tube itself returns nothing.

You can set the following options with the optional C<%args>:

=over

=item C<name>

set a name for the dispatcher, might be useful while debugging if you
plan to use more than one dispatcher.

=back

=item B<< dispatch >>

   my $tube = dispatch(%args); # OR
   my $tube = dispatch(\%args);

this function decides a sub-tube to use for dispatching a specific
record. The selection of the sub-tube is performed through two different
mechanisms:

=over

=item -

first, a I<selector> function is applied to the input record, optionally
defaulting to a configurable value. This selector is a string that MUST
uniquely identify the output tube where the record should be dispatched;

=item -

then, if the tube associated to the I<selector> is already known, it
will be used for the dispatching. Otherwise, a I<factory> will be used
to get a new handler tube for the specific I<selector>, if possible.

=back

The arguments passed through C<%args> allow you to define the
I<selector> and the I<factory> in a flexible way. Available options are:

=over

=item C<default>

this allows defining the default I<selection key> when none is available
(i.e. it would be the undefined value). If set to an C<undef> value,
lack of a selector will throw an exception. Defaults to C<undef>;

=item C<factory>

set a sub reference to generate new tubes when needed. The factory
function will be fed with the specific I<selection key> as the first
argument, and the record as the second argument, and it is supposed to
return a valid tube (although it might throw an exception by itself, of
course);

=item C<handlers>

this is a quick way to set a simple factory that just returns elements
from a hash reference (that is passed as value). If this is used, every
key that is I<not> present in the hash will throw an exception. If
C<factory> is present, this field will be ignored;

=item C<key>

this is a quick way to specify a selector function. It points to either
a string/integer, or an array containing a sequence of strings/integers;
these items will be used to access the provided C<$record> in a "visit"
that uses an item at each step. Example:

   $record = {aref => [1, 2, {foo => 'bar'}]};
   @key = qw< aref 2 foo >; # this will select 'bar' above

If the option C<selector> is passed, this field will be ignored;

=item C<name>

set a name for the dispatcher, might be useful while debugging if you
plan to use more than one dispatcher;

=item C<selector>

set to a subroutine reference that will be passed the input record and
SHOULD provide a string back, that will uniquely identify a tube.

=back

One between C<selector> or C<key> MUST be provided. One between
C<factory> and C<handlers> MUST be provided.


=item B<< fallback >>

   $tube = fallback(@tubes); # OR
   $tube = fallback(@tubes, \%args);

consider a series of tubes as different alternatives, to be triggered in
order until one of them does not throw an exception.

In simple terms, the first item in C<@tubes> is called with the input
record. If it throws an exception, the second item in C<@tubes> is
tried, and so on. The first one to I<NOT> throw na exception wins and
its result is returned. Think of it as some I<OR> function in tubeland,
applied to exception throwing. This function is very similar to
L</alternatives>, although there is a different exception handling here.

Returns nothing if all tubes throw an exception, otherwise it returns
the return value of the first tube that does not throw an exception, and
ignores the rest of the tubes.

The exception handling is performed via L<Try::Tiny>.

You can set the following options with the optional C<%args>:

=over

=item C<catch>

an optional sub reference to be called when an exception is catched. The
sub is called like this:

   $catcher->($exception, $record);

The return value of this function is ignored.

=item C<name>

set a name for the dispatcher, might be useful while debugging if you
plan to use more than one dispatcher.

=back


=item B<< logger >>

   my $tube = logger(%args); # OR
   my $tube = logger(\%args);

this function generates a tube that is useful for logging things. You
can pass the following arguments:

=over

=item C<loglevel>

the level where the logging should happen. See L<Log::Log4perl::Tiny>
for the available ones. You can pass either the numeric value of the log
level (as exported via C<:levels> by L<Log::Log4perl::Tiny>) or the log
level name (uppercase, e.g. C<INFO> or C<DEBUG>);

=item C<name>

the name assigned to the logger tube, might be useful while debugging;

=item C<target>

a facility to isolate part of the target record and/or produce a message
suitable for logging.

If not provided or undefined (which is the default), the whole input
record will be passed to the logger function. This is probably what you
don't want in the vast majority of cases, as you will only see a strange
address printed out. Works fine if the input record is something
printable, anyway.

The most flexible thing that you can pass is a sub reference. This will
receive the input record, and SHOULD return back a string that will be
printed in the log stream.

You can also provide either a string or a sequence of strings in an
array reference. In this case, the record will be visited using these
I<keys>, much in the same way as described for L</dispatch> above.
Again, you should be pretty sure that the leaf value found after this
traversal is something meaningful for printing.

=back

The generated tube always returns back the input record, unchanged.

=item B<< pipeline >>

   $tube = pipeline(@tubes); # OR
   $tube = pipeline(@tubes, \%args);

this is a thin wrapper around L</sequence>, added to avoid changing its
signature. It is the same as calling:

   $tube = sequence(tubes => \@tubes); # OR
   $tube = sequence(%args, tubes => \@tubes);

(depending on what you provide as input), only a bit more natural.

=item B<< sequence >>

   my $tube = sequence($tubes, %args); # OR
   my $tube = sequence(%args); # OR
   my $tube = sequence(\%args);

this function takes a sequence of tubes (i.e. functions that are
compliant with the I<tube> definition) and returns a I<tube> that
provides serialization of the operations, in the order as the passed
list.

The returned tube is such that it will always return an iterator back
(in particular, it will return two elements, the first is the string
C<iterator> and the second is an iterator sub reference).

Arguments can be passed through a single reference to a hash, or as a
sequence of key/value pairs. The following options are supported:

=over

=item C<name>

set a name for the sequence, which might come handy when debugging.
Defaults to C<sequence>;

=item C<logger>

can be optionally set to a function that will be called for each input
record, being passed the record itself and a reference to the hash of
arguments. Use this if you want to do some logging, ignore otherwise;

=item C<tubes>

an array reference containing the list of tubes part of the sequence.
These can be either direct tubes (i.e. references to subroutines) or
definitions suitable for calling C<tube> in L<Data::Tubes>. This
parameter can also be passed as the first unnamed argument in the call
to the function.

=back

The sequence makes no assumption as to the input record, although the
first element in the provided list might do.

Note that the last I<tube> in the sequence might actually return an
output record with an C<undef> or otherwise false value (Perl-wise). To
cope with this, when called in list context, the iterator is guaranteed
to either return one single output record, or the empty list when the
iterator is exhausted.

The suggested idiom for taking items from the iterator is then the
following:

   my $it1 = $sequence1->($input_record)->{iterator};
   while (my ($output_record) = $it1->()) {
      # work with $output_record here, it's your output record!
   }

   # if you're waiting for a single output record, use if
   my $it2 = $sequence2->($input_record)->{iterator};
   if (my ($output_record) = $it2->()) {
      # work with $output_record here, it's your output record!
   }

=back

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

Report bugs either through RT or GitHub (patches welcome).

=head1 AUTHOR

Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2016 by Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

This module is free software. You can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

=cut
