=pod

=for vim
   vim: tw=72 ts=3 sts=3 sw=3 et ai :

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Data::Tubes::Plugin::Renderer

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module contains factory functions to generate I<tubes> that ease
rendering records as text (or data).

Each of the generated tubes has the following contract:

=over

=item *

the input record MUST be a hash reference;

=item *

one field in the input record (according to factory argument C<input>,
set to C<structured> by default) indicates which input field contains
variables for expansion;

=item *

one field in the hash (according to factory argument C<output>, set to
C<rendered> by default) is set to the output of the reading operation.

=back

The factory functions below have two names, one starting with C<render_>
and the other without this prefix. They are perfectly equivalent to each
other, whereas the short version can be handier e.g. when using C<tube>
or C<pipeline> from L<Data::Tubes>.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

=over

=item B<< with_template_perlish >>

=item B<< render_with_template_perlish >>

   my $tube = with_template_perlish(%args); # OR
   my $tube = with_template_perlish(\%args);

render input variables using a L<Template::Perlish> template.

Allowed arguments are:

=over

=item C<input>

the name of the input field in the record, where record-specific
variables can be found;

=item C<name>

the name of the tube, useful when debugging;

=item C<output>

the name of the output field in the output record;

=item C<start>

parameter for L<Template::Perlish>, defaults to C<[%>;

=item C<stop>

parameter for L<Template::Perlish>, defaults to C<%]>;

=item C<template>

template that will be expanded, MUST be compliant with the rules
explained in L<Template::Perlish> and the setting above for L</start>
and L</stop>;

=item C<variables>

hash reference with variables that will always be available when
expanding the template.

=back

=back

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

Report bugs either through RT or GitHub (patches welcome).

=head1 AUTHOR

Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2016 by Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

This module is free software. You can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

=cut
